the US and Israel are on high alert
expecting retaliation over an Israeli
bombing of Iran's uh Embassy in Damascus
seven revolutionary guards were killed
in the attack on the Syrian Capital it
Iran has warned its Reser it reserves
the right to make a decisive response
Tran says Israeli war planes were used
in a major escalation in Israel's war
with its enemies in the
region benan bblu is a fellow a senior
fellow at the foundation for the defense
of democracy A Research Institute in
Washington DC thanks so much for joining
us he focuses on Iranian political and
security issues uh benam are we seeing a
major regional escalation here if Iran
decides to strike uh this would be a
serious serious uh
escalation uh greetings Melissa good to
be with you it depends a great deal on
how when and where the Islamic Republic
choose to respond or indeed if they
choose to escalate uh against the
Israeli strike that killed several
senior KS Force irgc extr territorial
operations uh uh military persons uh in
Damascus last week uh in essence one of
those individuals was really you could
say the connective tissue between the
irgc in Iran the Syrian regime in
Damascus and Hezbollah in Lebanon
there's also stories uh circulating as
of yesterday that that individual may
have had a hand in the October 7 Hamas
uh terrorist attack against Israel uh
nonetheless in the past when the Islamic
Republic has responded to perceived or
real Israeli threats it's done so with
drones and missiles but often against
innocent civilians in places like Iraq
as they did in 2022 and 24 alleging that
uh these are mosad bases with no proof
uh it's likely you could see some kind
of regional configuration like that
again but I don't think we're on the
path to a major war unless there's a
direct attack on Israeli territory which
I would put at low probability but high
impact now you've floated some of the
possibilities is there a general
consensus among the experts where the
what the primary targets might be and
where where exactly or is this hotly
debated uh it's something between a
consensus and a debate there's lots of
folks Yours Truly included uh looking at
the Hardline Iranian press trying to
Divine uh based on what is being said
currently out of tan as well as the past
precedence for how Iran has responded to
try to figure out what the Islamic
Republic might do uh interestingly the
past 48 Hours despite lots of tough
headlines coming out of Iran major
speeches made it look like the place and
the time would come at Iran's own
choosing so it's likely that this could
be a terror attack at a potential
Israeli Target Israeli diplomatic
facility isra Cultural Center uh in
places like Europe even this is
literally something that Iran's
ambassador to Iraq who actually himself
his former ambassador to Iraq I should
say who himself was a a KS Force
individual Flo just a few days ago in
the Persian press um there's of course
also activating the militias not just
against the Israelis but against the
Americans uh part of the Strategic logic
behind that might be uh to Push
Washington to try to constrain Israel
that would be an escalation though I
mean from some people
right uh indeed it my view would be an
escalation uh but ironically despite the
Islamic Republic knowing that America is
the more capable uh adversary when
compared to Israel uh there is actually
a greater willingness to embrace RK even
overtly against America when compared to
Israel because the government of the
Islamic Republic and its military Elite
have a different impression about
American resolve and American staying
power in the region when compared to
Israeli now do you think there's any
side uh that can do something to
deescalate the situation and what would
those moves look
like uh you know certainly the Islamic
Republic feels pressure pressure uh from
the AES of resistance but pressure based
on its own ideology to respond publicly
uh the question of course is the fact
that it can't achieve escalation
dominance against Israel means that it
certainly isn't going to be doing
anything to drive a major conflict at
least you know uh so long as they don't
strike Israeli territory given that
there's very there's literally nothing
that probably could be done to walk the
Islamic Republic back in fact things
that are driving it Forward are you know
the Drone program the missile program
unfortunately the more capable the
longrange St capabilities and the more
lethal these capabilities have become uh
the more often you've seen Iran actually
be willing to actually embrace risk and
in fact use these weapons and act on its
retoric so unfortunately I don't think
there's any kind of diplomatic walk back
but I do think strong messaging from
Washington uh that if this does get out
of control uh there will be a swift
military response uh could can contain
the nature of the Iranian military
response Ben I'm Ben tblu senior fellow
at the foundation for defense of
democracies thank you so much for
joining us
thank
you DW correspondent Rebecca ritters
joins us now from Jerusalem uh Rebecca
how seriously should these threats from
Iran be
taken well that's very difficult to say
Melissa but I think what is safe to say
is that they are being taken very
seriously as you said in your intro
there by the US and Israel especially uh
Iran has said that the Israel will
regret that strike that Israel hasn't
actually said that it did it hasn't
actually confirmed it was Israel but it
is uh generally regarded that it was an
Israeli attack Iran has said that they
will regret that attack that they their
military are are at the ready and they
are just deciding how when and where to
retaliate now analysts uh and officials
believe that it will in fact be a strike
from Iran rather than going through one
of their proxies namely Hezbollah in
Lebanon um that it could very well be
within the next week uh and that it will
likely be on either an Israeli Embassy
Target or something in Israel as you
mentioned the US Targets in the region
also possible but I think more likely
that it would be uh one of those first
two that I mentioned now as you say
everyone here on high alert particularly
US forces in the region and Israel
itself also on high alert saying its
forces are ready to respond to retaliate
and to defend
um so I think you know whichever way you
look at it this is being taken very
seriously and it's certainly the biggest
escalation we've seen Visa Iran since
the the conflict began in October so a
very tense situation and things feel
kind of imminent uh Iran has so far
avoided direct conflict with Israel
though so if it decides to strike inside
of Israel what are we looking at a
regional
War well that's obviously U the biggest
fear that certainly dominat
the news in Israel and Beyond in the
region I mean that is something that
people uh the US Israel citizens
officials have been concerned about
since the beginning I think you're right
to say that both sides uh have been
trying to avoid a direct conflict and I
think that uh stands that's certainly
what we're hearing from analysts is that
neither side do want to get into that
direct conflict so I think that will
determine where we will see this return
fire from Iran of course if it is on
Israeli soil there'll no doubt be a
response from Israel and it will just
depend where and and what is targeted
and how bad perhaps the civilian
casualties are uh that will determine
just how quickly uh this escalates you
know if if it is a more sedate response
then perhaps Israel will hold back for a
while it's really difficult to say at
this stage Melissa when we just don't
know exactly how it's going to play out
but I think we're certainly looking at a
potentially very large
escalation DW course respondent Rebecca
ritters thank you so
much in tan thousands turned out to
attend a funeral for seven members of
the Guard including two senior generals
who were killed in the blast clashes
between Israel and Iran back Hezbollah
along the Israeli Lebanese border have
increased since the war in Gaza began
nearly 6 months ago the funerals took
place on Al's day an annual event when
people in Iran and elsewhere around the
world stage Pro Palestinian
rallies
let's bring in my colleague anilu farani
for more welcome why are we seeing this
on alud day and what kind of reaction
have we seen from within Iran to this
funeral from what I heard from uh
pro-democracy activists and Ordinary
People or uh read on social media I can
assure you that people in Iran uh they
don't mourn but they are happy because
irgc and gos Force are hated among
majority of Iranians as they are
actively involved in oppressing citizens
during uh various protests especially in
the recent protest in Iran after the
death of jasa amini so um what we've
seen in these um funeral like always is
the minority who cooperates with the
regime directly uh like regime
supporters or the people who are
financially or ideologically have some
interest in the regime so uh
pro-democracy activists also saying that
this is the perfect timing for the
Islamic Republic as they use such events
for their own propaganda against Israel
and the west and just briefly before I
let you go here looking at the
increasing increasingly dire security
situation How likely do you think we are
at this point to see a direct
confrontation between Iran and Israel um
only in 2024 Israel has conducted uh
more than 30 attacks on Iranian Targets
in Syria and killed 21 one uh God's
Force members but there has been no
answer to uh these attacks I I I don't
think this time is won't be any direct
confrontation as uh it could drag us to
the war with Iran and it is the listing
that the Iranian regime wants I need to
mention that here that one of the
political organizations uh that belong
to the highliners claimed that zah that
has been killed um in Syria was involved
in the um plot of the attack of on SE
October 7th in Israel but I think it
only be uh attacked by a Paris neaar
thank you so much for that that is neaar
golami